What is workplace security?
Workplace security refers to the measures put in place to ‌‌‌‌‍‌‌﻿protect people, assets, and intellectual property from physical and ‌‌‌‌‍‌‌‬digital threats. These threats can come in different forms, ranging from theft, violence, and vandalism to digital security risks such as cyberattacks, data breaches, and hacking. When thinking about workplace‌‌‌‌‍‌‌﻿ security, it’s important to put the right measures in place to guard against both physical and digital security threats.

Physical security refers to all of the physical assets in your workplace, such as your employees, equipment, visitors, and office. On the other hand, digital security refers to‌‌‌‌‍‍‍‌ the protection of data, information, ideas, and systems. You may not be able to see or touch these assets, but they are vital to the success and integrity of your business.

The importance of security in the workplace
Security in the workplace keeps your employees and physical offices safe from harm. So, your workplace security strategy should defend your business's critical data and information from hackers and other cyber security threats. It also keeps you compliant with ‌‌‌‌‍‌‍‬updated laws and regulations in your country or region.

In ‌‌‌‌‍﻿‬﻿today's modern workplace, there's a lot to protect, but not everything is visible to the eye or easy to spot. And it turns out these invisible assets cost a lot. The average cost of a data ‌‌‌‌‍﻿‬‍breach was $4.88 million in 2024.

4 reasons why workplace security is important
Understanding the importance of security in the workplace is the first step to ensuring everyone prioritizes it. While physical and digital security is important, your employees must also understand the ‌‌‌‌‌﻿‌‌importance of safety in the workplace. To maintain a high level of security across your business, it’s crucial that everyone can respond quickly to new developments, changes, or attacks.

Here are four reasons why security is a crucial priority in your workplace:

1. Workplace security keeps employees and visitors safe
Your first priority when it comes to safety and security in the workplace should be your people. Employees are at the heart of your ‌‌‌‌‍﻿‍‍business and your workplace, so they are invaluable assets to protect. A workplace security policy means your employees and visitors will feel safe entering your facilities. That will lead to a better workplace experience for everyone, plus a better reputation ‌‬‌‌‌‍‬‍for your business.

2. Workplace security protects your data and systems
Cyber attacks have increased dramatically in recent years. So much so that as 52% of organizations report experiencing a‌‌‌‌‍﻿‌‬ data breach, more than half of leaders (62%) plan to allocate more resources to workplace protection. A robust cybersecurity plan will help you protect‌‌‌‌‌﻿‌﻿ sensitive data and the privacy of your‌‌‌‌‍‍﻿﻿ employees.

3. Workplace‌‌‌‌‍‬﻿‬ security controls access to any building
Many different people come into your workplace for different reasons. It could be a final-stage candidate coming in for an interview or a maintenance worker fixing your meeting room doors. As your workplace gets busier, monitoring ‌‌‌‌‌﻿‌‌and controlling access levels for every visitor becomes more important. With a workplace security policy, you’ll be able to customize accessibility and track who’s allowed where in your workplace. This could help you ‌‌‌‌‍﻿‍‌prevent intruders or suspicious characters from entering your building or unauthorized areas.

4. Workplace security keeps you compliant
On top of safety and security in the workplace, organizations must also be savvy ‌‌‌‌‍‍﻿﻿about workplace compliance laws and regulations. Compliance failures can be costly and detrimental to organizations. In fact, the average cost of non-compliance sits at a‌‌‌‌‍﻿‌‬ whopping $14.82 million globally. Many compliance regulations deal closely with the safety and security of your people and assets. By prioritizing workplace security, you’ll be one step closer to maintaining compliance and acing your audits.

Tools that improve workplace security
Now that we’ve gone over ‌‌‌‌‌﻿‌﻿what workplace security is, why ‌‌‌‌‍‬‌‍it’s important, and the benefits of having a workplace security plan, it’s time to take action. What tools will help your workplace accomplish your security goals? There are plenty of efficient technologies out there to help you rise to the challenge, but here are a ‌‌‌‌‍‬‍‌few to get you started:

Access control technology
As mentioned above, it’s ‌‌‌‌‍﻿‬‍‌‌‌‌‍‍﻿﻿important to only give building access to the people who are allowed to have it. To help in that effort, you’ll want to invest in an access control system. Access ‌‌‌‌‍‬‍‬control can come in different forms. Common ones you might know are badges, QR codes, facial recognition, or touch IDs. For workplaces, access control means you can manage building security in one or all of your office locations. You can control who can enter your building and with what level of permission, giving you ease of mind that your people and property are protected.

Sensors‌‌‌‌‌﻿‌‌ and alarms
Installing sensors and alarms throughout the workplace can help detect potential security ‌‌‌‌‍﻿‌‬breaches. For example, motion ‌‌‌‌‍‍﻿﻿sensors can trigger an alarm if someone enters a restricted area, while smoke detectors can alert personnel to potential fires. By using sensors ‌‌‌‌‍‬﻿‍and alarms, you can quickly respond to security threats and prevent damage or theft.‌‌‌‌‍﻿‬‍

Password protection tools
A password protection tool like Okta ensures that the passwords on shared company accounts are walled off behind ‌‌‌‌‍‍﻿﻿multiple authentications. This allows only employees to access those accounts. In addition, encouraging employees to‌‌‌‌‍‬﻿‬ use strong passwords and change them regularly can go a long way in protecting intellectual‌‌‌‌‌﻿‌﻿ property.

Visitor management system
A visitor management system (VMS) ensures that‌‌‌‌‍﻿‬‌ only authorized visitors are allowed into the workplace. It lets‌‌‌‌‍﻿‍‌ you get a complete picture of who's onsite and when. To avoid any‌‌‌‌‍‍﻿﻿ unwanted guests and security breaches, you can use your visitor management ‌‌‌‌‍‬﻿‍solution to screen people before they get to your office. Look for a VMS that includes features like blocklists and ID verification that automatically protect against unwanted guests discreetly in the background.

—

Workplace security is one of‌‌‌‌‌﻿‌‌ those things that you have to do without cutting corners. The more careless you‌‌‌‌‍﻿‍‬ are ‌‌‌‌‍‬‍‍with workplace security, the more vulnerable you are to an attack. But don't worry because improving your workplace security doesn't have to be‌‌‌‌‍﻿﻿‍ complicated. Once you have the foundations and tools in place, you'll be better prepared to keep your workplace and employees safe from harm.

Want to know more about workplace security? Check out our workplace security kit! It's filled with different pieces of content that will help you develop, implement, and manage your security policies from end to end.
